The original free software company 

The model for running a business that sells free software goes back a 
long way. In 1989, two years before Linus Torvalds made the first Linux 
announcement to comp.os.minix and nine years before the creation of the 
"Open Source Initiative", John Gilmore, David Vinayak Wallace and 
Michael Tiemann set up Cygnus Support (later Cygnus Solutions), the 
first company in the world dedicated to the promotion and support of 
free software. 

According to John Gilmore, the slogan on the first Cygnus Support 
T-shirt was "We make free software affordable." 

Cygnus became a key contributor to GNU and Linux and reaped a 
considerable reward for being the first company to take the then radical 
(and to many people, counter-intuitive) step of marketing software that 
was released exclusively under free software licenses. Richard Stallman 
noted that Cygnus was a recursive acronym for 'Cygnus - Your GNU 
Support', although Tiemann later quipped "That's like saying Emacs 
stands for 'Eight Megabytes And Constantly Swapping'." 

By the time the company was acquired by Red Hat for $600 million in 
November 1999, "making all of its early employees into millionaires", 
Cygnus employed more than 120 people and had annual revenues over $20 
million. A Socialist Polemic 

"On the surface", Tiemann wrote of his initial encounter with free 
software, the GNU Manifesto "read like a socialist polemic, but I saw 
something different. I saw a business plan in disguise. The basic idea 
was simple: Open Source would unify the efforts of programmers around 
the world, and companies that provided commercial services 
(customisations, enhancements, bug fixes, support) based on that 
software could capitalise on the economies of scale..." 

In the same article Tiemann recounted "At first I tried to make my 
argument the way that Stallman made his: on the merits. I would explain 
how freedom to share would lead to greater innovation at lower cost, 
greater economies of scale through more open standards, and people would 
universally respond 'It's a great idea, but it will never work, because 
nobody is going to pay money for free software.' After two years of 
polishing my rhetoric, refining my arguments, and delivering my messages 
to people who paid for me to fly all over the world, I never got farther 
than 'It's a great idea, but...,' then I had my second insight: if 
everybody thinks it's a great idea, it probably is, and if nobody thinks 
it will work, I'll have no competition!" 

Subsequently, Cygnus became a significant provider of support for free 
software products in many sectors of industry. Major clients included 
Intel, AMD, 3Com and Adobe. And as Gilmore recounts "ultimately, we did 
get million-dollar contracts, such as one from Sony for building 
PlayStation compilers and emulators. This allowed game developers to 
start working a year before the PlayStation hardware was available." The 
Route to Untold Riches 

The attractions of building a business around free software are obvious. 
In his definition of Open Core Licensing Lampitt argues that vendors 
profit from the knowledge that "the open source nature of a product 
promotes a lively ecosystem that pops up around it. That ecosystem might 
be driven by a handful of hardcore developers and/or partners, as well 
as the occasional 'long tail' specialist contributors. Nonetheless, the 
benefit is there." 

JBoss claims downloads reaching into the millions. Its paying customers 
are many less, but free downloads provide free advertising, bring future 
contributors and customers, and encourage feedback. In the long run, 
paying JBoss to maintain the software is cheaper than employing a 
specialist to do the work for you. 

The days of Gates and Ellison, when software could be the route to 
untold riches, are gone, perhaps forever, not just because of the 
influence of free software, but because the pace of development and 
customisation in the world of information technology means that the long 
term value of software is somewhere near to zero. Last year's 
revolutionary product is soon defunct or commoditised.


